# Free and open-source software (FOSS) for students and researchers

## Personal experience

I am a graduate student in Malaysia, doing research on solar cells. In Malaysia, it has been my experience that it is very rare to see students using a Linux operating system and knowingly using free and open-source software (FOSS). A large majority of people use Windows, macOS, proprietary software or some version of freemium or freeware software. In my experience, when people use open-source software, it is due to the fact that it's costless, and therefore convenient. This is not an attack against proprietary software or people, by the way. This is a mere observation. In fact, I would say that I used proprietary software too and still do.

During my bachelor's degree, I tried using open-source software as integral parts of my workflow to complete my undergraduate dissertation, and it was quite successful. I used the MX Linux distribution (though any distribution would suffice), I used LibreOffice Writer and Zotero to write my dissertation and manage my references (in hindsight I should have probably used LaTeX but I'm getting ahead of myself), I used LibreOffice Calc to visualise numerical data, I used a Python programme called TanabeSugano on Github and Fityk for a numerical and analytical works. There was one proprietary software that I had to use which was OriginPro, and that was because using the open-source version (Fityk is the open-source counterpart) was insufficient for my specific purpose at that moment.

There was also a subject called *Fizik Komputasi* (English: Computational Physics), where we had to use MATLAB to learn some basic scientific and mathematical programming. And while I did use MATLAB, I also used GNU Octave, which is basically a clone of MATLAB. It is mostly compatible with MATLAB and if you were to use GNU Octave to learn this course, it wouldn't make much of a difference. Every code that I ran on MATLAB, I was able to run on Octave with practically identical results. This made me think about having entirely or almost entirely free and open-source software as a student.

This might sound strange to students in other parts of the world. In that, it seems that I make using FOSS out to be some kind of strange endeavour. I imagine that for academic documents, LaTeX is pretty common at universities throughout the world. For some reason, LaTeX was never mentioned to me at university by anyone except for one lecturer who said that they wasn't familiar with how to use it. Everybody used Microsoft Office to write dissertations. And from my understanding, LaTeX is heavily used in scientific and mathematical fields. I was a physics student. "But hey," I thought, "maybe it is used in postgraduate more?" but it was not the case too, at least not for me. I am also not using LaTeX as I am currently doing my Masters.

When I read up online, it seems that students all over the world use LaTeX. Now, this is not an essay about LaTeX, but rather just a specific example of the dependence on proprietary software (e.g. MS Office, MATLAB) to do academic works, *especially* undergraduate works. And so, I have given it a little bit of thought.

## What is free and open-source software (FOSS), anyway?

This essay is not meant to be a treatise on why free and open-source software (FOSS) is principally or philosophically superior to proprietary software. To discuss the principles, ethics or ideology behind FOSS is out of the scope of this particular writing. However, I will have to point out the social benefits of FOSS, stemming from its philosophy. It is impossible to avoid that. With that being said, I do like to discuss the topic of FOSS vs proprietary from a technical standpoint. To even begin though, I need to explain what FOSS is for the unfamiliar.

For those who don't really know about FOSS, the history of FOSS is a bit long to expound. So I'll simply define it: free and open-source software are software in which anybody and everybody can access, study, modify, and distribute the source code. Source code is what makes up software, and that is now open for everybody to benefit from and contribute to. It is sort of like recipes and ingredients of a food; some are proprietary (like McDonald's and KFC's), and lots are open (like... almost every food out there). The catch is though, many of these FOSS use the open-source license such as GNU GPL v3, which dictates that everybody who uses open-source codes, must make their codes open-source as well. So for example, if you come across an open-source project, and you copied their code and make your own modifications towards the code, you now are required by the license to also make your code accessible, modifiable, and distributable. It is to restrict the act of someone essentially stealing an open-source code and making it proprietary, thereby going against the entire purpose of FOSS.

So, FOSS is not merely "free" software. Even that is confusing. The word "free" in "free and open-source" does not mean free as in zero cost, but free as in free speech; it's an idea of freedom and liberation, rather than cost. Technically speaking, FOSS could cost money. Due to its open nature though, I have never needed to pay for any FOSS, *except* for when it has a freemium package. Basically it's when you have a basic version of the software, but to access more advanced capabilities or technical support, you have to pay. But in all of my work, I have never been required to pay to access and utilise some pretty powerful programmes.
